New Post: Building a Privacy-First Analytics Business based entirely on Swift (#1338)
apple/swift-org-website: _posts/2026-03-05-building-privacy-first-analytics-with-swift.md

---
layout: new-layouts/post
published: true
date: 2026-03-05 10:00:00

> title: Building a Privacy-First Analytics Business based entirely on Swift

Author: Thanks a lot for your suggestions!! I accepted them all because they were very good!

> title: Building a privacy-first analytics business based entirely on Swift

Reviewer: +1 to this suggestion. I also think having "privacy-first" in the title, while descriptive of the product, wasn't descriptive of the post contents. The simplified change suggested would also address that.

Adding as a GH suggestion for ease of integrating:
```suggestion
title: Swift at scale: building the TelemetryDeck analytics service
```

author: [danieljilg]
category: 'Adopters'
---

TelemetryDeck is an [app analytics service](https://telemetrydeck.com) specifically for developers, designed to manage usage analytics that are anonymized, privacy-focused, and really easy to use. TelemetryDeck is touching the lives of over 16 million people every month, helping thousands of app publishers improve their products, and we're doing it all with a Swift-based infrastructure.

The decision to go with Swift brought a lot of unexpected advantages for us. We come from a world of iOS in the frontend, Python, Node, or Ruby in the backend for server-based applications. Compared to these languages and frameworks, Swift is just as easy to use, and its compiled nature allows us to catch a lot of possible errors at compile time instead of runtime, making it ideal for a hardened, high-performance web service.

Let me share our journey and history with you.

## Adopting Swift for backend services

TelemetryDeck is built on [Vapor](https://vapor.codes/), a web framework written in Swift, for building scalable APIs and services.

> Similar to [other Vapor-based projects like Things](https://www.swift.org/blog/how-swifts-server-support-powers-things-cloud/), TelemetryDeck runs on containers hosted in Kubernetes. Our metadata lives in Postgres, and our analytics data is stored in Apache Druid. We use Swift-native connectors to access APIs for these services. Some of those come from the Swift community, others we've written ourselves and are giving back to the open source ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similar to [other Vapor-based projects like Things](/blog/how-swifts-server-support-powers-things-cloud/), TelemetryDeck runs on containers hosted in Kubernetes. Our metadata lives in Postgres, and our analytics data is stored in Apache Druid. We use Swift-native connectors to access APIs for these services. Some of those come from the Swift community, others we've written ourselves and are giving back to the open source ecosystem.
```

> In the very beginning, when TelemetryDeck was just a little exploratory hobby project, we wanted to go with Swift on the server simply because we love Swift, and we're pretty decent at it. Vapor was new, and we figured, let's try this out and learn a new way to apply and combine my skills.

Reviewer: Fixes inconsistency in pronoun usage.

> In the very beginning, when TelemetryDeck was just a little explorative hobby project, I wanted to go with Swift on the Server simply because I love Swift, and I'm pretty decent at it. Vapor was new, and I figured, let's try this out and learn a new way to apply and combine my skills.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the very beginning, when TelemetryDeck was just a little exploratory hobby project, I wanted to go with Swift on the Server simply because I love Swift, and I'm pretty decent at it. Vapor was new, and I figured, let's try this out and learn a new way to apply and combine my skills.
```

> In the very beginning, when TelemetryDeck was just a little exploratory hobby project, I wanted to go with Swift on the Server simply because I love Swift, and I'm pretty decent at it. Vapor was new, and I figured, let's try this out and learn a new way to apply and combine my skills.

Reviewer: Possible revision:

```suggestion
In the very beginning, when TelemetryDeck was just a little exploratory hobby project, we wanted to go with Swift on the server simply because we love Swift and we're pretty decent at it. Vapor was new, and we figured, let's try this out and learn a new way to apply and combine my skills.
```

In the end, this decision turned out to be exactly the right one and resulted in a lean architecture that is highly performant, stable, and allows us to develop and iterate quickly.

> Swift's performance characteristics are remarkable. Especially in multithreading, where Python struggles with the Global Interpreter Lock and true parallelism, Swift excels. Our infrastructure handles 16 million users per month with resources that would buckle other architectures. The efficiency gains aren't just theoretical—they translate directly to lower infrastructure costs and a better user experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Swift's performance characteristics are remarkable. Especially in multithreading, where Python struggles with the Global Interpreter Lock and true parallelism, Swift excels. Our infrastructure handles 16 million users per month with resources that would buckle other architectures. The efficiency gains aren't just theoretical — they translate directly to lower infrastructure costs and a better user experience.
```

Reviewer: Adds spacing before/after emdash, to be consistent with the other use in the post.

## Swift's Codable protocol

In an API-based application, you spend an enormous amount of time encoding and decoding JSON. Swift's Codable protocol turns what's traditionally error-prone boilerplate into straightforward, type-safe operations. When a request comes in with malformed data, Swift's type system rejects it immediately with no manual validation required. This isn't just convenient; it's a security feature that prevents entire classes of vulnerabilities.

```swift
struct Notebook: Codable, Content {
    let appID: UUID

>     let var snapshots: [NotebookSnapshot]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    var snapshots: [NotebookSnapshot]
```

    let createdAt: Date
    let title: String
}
```

With just these few lines, we get parsing, validation, and type safety.

Just like the postal system – which only accepts letters addressed in a specific format – the API endpoint described in the above bit of code will reject any data that doesn't fit into this Codable.

We don't have to check for types, additional properties, or JSON validity, something that lets us trust our APIs more when developing and sleep easy after deploying. "Just lick the stamp and send it," as a friend of mine once encouraged me.

## Sharing Data Transfer Objects between Client and Server

> For a long time, TelemetryDeck was offering a SwiftUI-based desktop application for interacting with analytics data, displaying dashboards, and exploring correlations. This meant we could use the same structs for encoding data on the server and decoding it on the client – these are called Data Transfer Objects or DTOs. We kept a separate package "SwiftDTOs" that was shared between both clients and the server code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a long time, TelemetryDeck offered a SwiftUI-based desktop application for interacting with analytics data, displaying dashboards, and exploring correlations. This meant we could use the same structs for encoding data on the server and decoding it on the client – these are called Data Transfer Objects or DTOs. We kept a separate package "SwiftDTOs" that was shared between both clients and the server code.
```

> However, we ran into trouble when we updated our APIs to new versions with slightly different inputs and outputs. We always have the API version in our paths, which helps us to continuously develop them while keeping compatibility with clients that take a while to update, but this structure made it hard to keep updating the Data Transfer Objects quickly because it unnecessarily coupled our API versions together in an uncomfortable way.

Reviewer: @winsmith I looked to clarify what you meant by "unnecessarily coupled our API versions together in an uncomfortable way" in my revision, please let me know if this accurately describes the problem. Overall, the more specific we can be about the problem, the better!

For our newest API version, we abandoned this approach. DTOs now live directly in their controllers as inline structs:

```swift
extension V3QueryController {
    struct QueryRequest: Codable {
        let query: QueryDefinition
        let timeRange: TimeRange
    }

    struct QueryResponse: Codable {
        let results: [QueryResult]
        let metadata: ResponseMetadata
    }
}
```

The lesson? Keep your DTOs close to your controllers. It's simpler, more maintainable, and makes changes easier. Sometimes the obvious solution is the right one.

## Developer experience matters

> One underappreciated aspect of Swift on the server is the development experience. We can develop in Xcode, our favorite IDE, with full debugging capabilities.

Reviewer 4: Ideally you'd mention that Xcode isn't the only choice -- even if it's what you used. We don't want to dissuade folk from using Swift for services even if they're running on Linux or Windows and using a different editor.

Under the hood, a Swift Vapor project is just a Swift Package with some dependencies. You open it in Xcode, you press Cmd+U to run the tests, you run it and set breakpoints and step through them when you're following a bug through the stack.

Our web API services usually have a database attached to them, so when we're developing, we can either run PostgreSQL on our machines right next to the code, or we can ask Swift Vapor's database layer (Fluent) to use a different database for development, such as a local SQLite file.

The end result is a very comfortable experience that allows us to use an IDE specifically built for Swift development, without having to play around with containers or terminal commands, although that is also a possibility of course.

This flexibility matters when you're building a business. We can onboard new developers quickly because the tooling is familiar. We can iterate rapidly because the feedback loop is tight. And we can maintain high code quality because Swift's type system catches errors at compile time, not in production.

## We win and lose together

> We love the open source ecosystem around Swift on the server. There are Swift packages for external services like payment providers and transactional emails. There are tools like Imperial for Single Sign-On, and Swift-Crypto for good cryptography.

Reviewer: Adds links to both packages, and revised `Swift-Crypto` to have a space -- it'd either be `Swift Crypto` or `swift-crypto`, and this would be more consistent other package names in the post.

> Whenever a piece of the puzzle is missing, we try to give back as much as possible. That is partly because the Swift developer community is fantastic in coming up with SDKs for various services, and we try to contribute to existing projects like StripeKit or even release our own new SDKs like BrevoKit.

Reviewer: Re: StripeKit, is it worth mentioning what specifically was contributed?
